**PoET Non-Commercial License Agreement**

**Grant of License**: NE47 Bio, Inc. (d/b/a OpenProtein.AI) grants users a non-exclusive, non-transferable, royalty-free license to use, as applicable, provided data, data outputs, examples, weights and biases, and other artifacts provided with or generated by the PoET-2 large protein model (referred to as “the Artifacts” herein) solely for non-commercial, internal research, and educational purposes. This license agreement incorporates the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 ([CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/deed.en)) license terms except as such terms may be modified or supplemented by the terms and conditions specified herein.

**Permitted Use**: The Artifacts may be used solely by non-Commercial Entities for non-commercial purposes (Permitted Users). A commercial purpose is a primary intent to gain a commercial advantage or monetary compensation.  Permitted uses include: 

* basic research  
* educational activities  
* personal experimentation  
* benchmarking  
* performance evaluation

A Commercial Entity is a company, organization, or other legal entity that is operated to generate profits from its activities and undertakings (or any individual accessing the Artifacts on behalf of or in connection with any such company, organization, or legal entity). 

**Prohibited Use**: No users (whether Commercial Entities or Permitted Users) may use the Artifacts for any commercial purpose without obtaining a separate, written license from NE47 Bio, Inc. Prohibited commercial purposes include:

* selling, leasing, or licensing the Artifacts or any derivative works of the Artifacts  
* using the Artifacts, directly or indirectly, to provide services to third parties for a fee  
* incorporating the Artifacts into a commercial product  
* using the Artifacts in connection with the development or operation of a commercial product  
* using the Artifacts for or in connection with sponsored research

**No Patent License**: This license does not grant any rights to any patents or patent applications held by NE47 Bio, Inc.

**Modification**: Users may modify the Artifacts solely for their own non-commercial, internal research, and educational purposes.

**Disclaimer of Warranty**: The Artifacts are provided "as is", without express or implied warranties of any kind.

**Limitation of Liability**: In no event shall NE47 Bio, Inc. be liable for any damages arising out of the use or inability to use the Artifacts.  
